## Compiling a Linux kernel (201.2) 

Candidates should be able to properly configure a kernel to include or
disable specific features of the Linux kernel as necessary. This
objective includes compiling and recompiling the Linux kernel as needed,
updating and noting changes in a new kernel, creating an `initrd` image
and installing new kernels.

###  Key Knowledge Areas

-   `/usr/src/linux/`

-   Kernel Makefiles

-   Kernel 2.6.x, 3.x and 4.x make targets

-   Customize the current kernel configuration

-   Build a new kernel and appropriate kernel modules

-   Install a new kernel and any modules

-   Ensure that the boot manager can locate the new kernel and
    associated files

-   Module configuration files

-   Use DKMS to compile kernel modules

-   Awareness of `dracut`

###  Terms and Utilities

-   `mkinitrd`

-   `mkinitramfs`

-   `make`

-   `make` targets (all, config, xconfig, menuconfig, gconfig,
    oldconfig, mrproper, zImage, bzImage, modules, modules\_install,
    rpm-pkg, binrpm-pkg, deb-pkg)

-   `gzip`

-   `bzip2`

-   module tools

-   `/usr/src/linux/.config`

-   `/lib/modules/kernel-version/`

-   `depmod`

## Getting the kernel sources

Kernel sources for almost all kernel versions can be found at [The Linux Kernel Archives](https://www.kernel.org).

The filenames in the Linux Kernel Archive mimic the version numbering
conventions for the kernel. For example: The filename format for kernel
version 3.0 and 4.0 is `linux-`*kernel-version*`.tar.xz` Thus,
`linux-3.18.43.tar.xz` is the kernel archive for version "3.18.43".

The used version numbering convention for the 3.0 and 4.0 kernel is
`linux-`*A.B.C*`.tar.xz` where:

-   A denotes the kernel version. It is only changed when major changes
    in code and concept take place.

-   B denotes the revision.

-   C is the patch number

See the paragraph on [???](#KernelVersioning) to learn more about the
various conventions that are and have been in use.

A common location to store and unpack kernel sources is `/usr/src`. You
can use another location as long as you create a symbolic link from your
new source directory to `/usr/src/linux`

The source code for the kernel is available as a compressed tar archive
in `xz` (`.xz` extention) format. Decompress the archive with `unxz`.
The resulting `tar` archive can be unpacked with the `tar` utility, for
example:

        # unxz linux-3.18.43.tar.xz
        # tar xvf linux-3.18.43.tar
                

You can also uncompress and untar in one step `tar` using the `J`option:

        # tar Jxvf linux-3.18.43.tar.xz
            

Refer to the man-pages on `tar` and, `xz` for more information.

##  Cleaning the kernel

To make sure you start with a clean state you should "clean" the kernel
first. When you compile a kernel into objects, the `make` utility
keeps track of things and will not recompile any code it thinks has been
correctly compiled before. In some cases, however, this may cause
problems, especially when you change the kernel configuration. It is
therefore customary to "clean" the source directory if you reconfigure
the kernel.

Cleaning can be done on three levels:

`make clean`

-   Deletes most generated files, but leaves enough to build external
    modules.

`make mrproper`

-   Deletes the current configuration and all generated files.

`make distclean`

-   Removes editor backup files, patch leftover files and the like.

Running `make mrproper` before configuring and building a
kernel is generally a good idea.

**Note**
Be warned that `make mrproper` deletes the main configuration file
too. You may want to make a backup of it first for future reference.

##  Creating a `.config` file

First you will need to configure the kernel. Configuration information
is stored in the `.config` file. There are well over 500 options in that
file, for example for filesystem, SCSI and networking support. Most of
the options allow you to choose if you will have them compiled directly
into the kernel or have them compiled as a module. Some selections imply
a group of other selections. For example, when you indicate that you
wish to include SCSI support, additional options become available for
specific SCSI drivers and features.

Some of the kernel support options *must* be compiled as a module, some
can only be compiled as permanent part of the kernel and for some
options you will be able to select either possibility.

There are a number of methods to configure the kernel, but regardless
which method you use, the results of your choices are always stored in
the kernel configuration file `/usr/src/linux/.config`. It is a plain
text file which lists all the options as shell variables.

        #
        # Automatically generated make config: don't edit
        # Linux kernel version: 2.6.28
        # Sat Feb  6 18:16:23 2010
        #
        CONFIG_64BIT=y
        # CONFIG_X86_32 is not set
        CONFIG_X86_64=y
        CONFIG_X86=y
        CONFIG_ARCH_DEFCONFIG="arch/x86/configs/x86_64_defconfig"
        CONFIG_GENERIC_TIME=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_CMOS_UPDATE=y
        CONFIG_CLOCKSOURCE_WATCHDOG=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_CLOCKEVENTS=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_CLOCKEVENTS_BROADCAST=y
        CONFIG_LOCKDEP_SUPPORT=y
        CONFIG_STACKTRACE_SUPPORT=y
        CONFIG_HAVE_LATENCYTOP_SUPPORT=y
        CONFIG_FAST_CMPXCHG_LOCAL=y
        CONFIG_MMU=y
        CONFIG_ZONE_DMA=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_ISA_DMA=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_IOMAP=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_BUG=y
        CONFIG_GENERIC_HWEIGHT=y
        ...
                    

To start configuration, change your current working directory to the top
of the source tree:

        # cd /usr/src/linux
            

As said, there are several ways to create or modify the `.config` file.
It is strongly discouraged to edit this file manually. Instead you
should use the `make` command with one of the four appropriate targets
to configure your kernel.

These four targets are:

-   config

-   menuconfig

-   xconfig\|gconfig

-   oldconfig

These targets will be explained below in more detail.

###   make config



Running `make config` is the most rudimentary approach.

It has clear advantages and disadvantages:

-   It does not depend on full-screen display capabilities. You can use
    it on extremely slow links, or on systems with very limited display
    capabilities.

-   You will have to work your way through *all* possible questions
    concerning kernel options. The system will present them sequentially
    and without exception. Only when you have answered *all* questions
    will you be allowed to save the configuration file. Given that,
    there are many hundreds of options to go through so this method is
    tedious. Because you cannot move back and forth through the various
    questions you are forced to redo everything if you make a mistake.

An example session looks like this:

        # make config
          HOSTCC  scripts/basic/fixdep
          HOSTCC  scripts/basic/docproc
          HOSTCC  scripts/basic/hash
          HOSTCC  scripts/kconfig/conf.o
        scripts/kconfig/conf.c: In function 'conf_askvalue':
        scripts/kconfig/conf.c:104: warning: ignoring return value of 'fgets', \
            declared with attribute warn_unused_result
        scripts/kconfig/conf.c: In function 'conf_choice':
        scripts/kconfig/conf.c:306: warning: ignoring return value of 'fgets', \
            declared with attribute warn_unused_result
          HOSTCC  scripts/kconfig/kxgettext.o
          HOSTCC  scripts/kconfig/zconf.tab.o
        In file included from scripts/kconfig/zconf.tab.c:2486:
        scripts/kconfig/confdata.c: In function 'conf_write':
        scripts/kconfig/confdata.c:501: warning: ignoring return value of 'fwrite', \
            declared with attribute warn_unused_result
        scripts/kconfig/confdata.c: In function 'conf_write_autoconf':
        scripts/kconfig/confdata.c:739: warning: ignoring return value of 'fwrite', \
            declared with attribute warn_unused_result
        scripts/kconfig/confdata.c:740: warning: ignoring return value of 'fwrite', \
            declared with attribute warn_unused_result
        In file included from scripts/kconfig/zconf.tab.c:2487:
        scripts/kconfig/expr.c: In function 'expr_print_file_helper':
        scripts/kconfig/expr.c:1090: warning: ignoring return value of 'fwrite', \
            declared with attribute warn_unused_result
          HOSTLD  scripts/kconfig/conf
        scripts/kconfig/conf arch/x86/Kconfig
        *
        * Linux Kernel Configuration
        *
        *
        * General setup
        *
        Prompt for development and/or incomplete code/drivers (EXPERIMENTAL) [Y/n/?]
            
###   make menuconfig

The `make menuconfig` method is more intuitive and can be used as an
alternative to `make config`. It creates a text-mode windowed
environment based on the `ncurses` libraries. You can switch back and
forth between options. The sections are laid out in a menu-like
structure which is easy to navigate and you can save and quit whenever
you want. If you prefer a darker color scheme, use `make nconfig`. The
`make menuconfig` menu display.

When done, use the arrow keys to select the *Exit* option at the bottom
of the screen. If any changes were made you will be prompted if you
would like to save the new configuration. You can also choose to save
the configuration using another name and/or location in the filesystem.

**Note**
If you choose another name or location you need to move the `.config`
file into the `/usr/src/linux` directory to compile the kernel.

### `make xconfig` and `make gconfig`

The `make xconfig` command presents a GUI menu to configure the
kernel. It requires a working X Window System and the QT development
libraries to work. It will provide a menu which can be navigated using a
mouse. Use `make gconfig` to use Gnome instead of QT. This requires
the GTK+ 2.x development libraries to be available. First, we show you
how the top-level `make xconfig` window looks:

![ The `make xconfig` top-level window.
](images/201-xconfig.jpg)

As said, the command `make gconfig` does exactly the same, but uses
GTK instead of QT:

![ The `make gconfig` top-level window.
](images/201-gconfig.jpg)

###  make oldconfig


`make oldconfig` can be used to preserve options you choose during an
earlier kernel build.

Make sure the `.config` file that was the result of the earlier build is
copied into `/usr/src/linux/`. When you run `make oldconfig`, the
original `.config` file will be moved to `.config.old` and a new
`.config` will be created. You will be prompted for answers that can not
be found in the previous configuration file, for example when there are
new options for the new kernel.

**Note**
Be sure to make a backup of `.config` before upgrading the kernel
source, because the distribution might contain a default `.config` file,
overwriting your old file.

**Note**
`make  xconfig`, `make 
                gconfig` and `make 
                menuconfig` will *automatically* use the old `.config`
file (if available) to construct a new one, preserving as much options
as possible while adding new options using their default values.

##  Compiling the kernel {#CompileKernel}

Use the following sequence of `make` commands to build and install the
kernel and modules:

1.  `make clean`

2.  `make zImage/bzImage`

3.  `make modules`

4.  `make modules_install`

###  make clean

The "clean" argument removes old output files that may exist from
previous kernel builds. These include core files, system map files and
others.

###   make zImage/bzImage

The `zImage` and `bzImage` arguments both effectively build the kernel.
The difference between these two is explained in
[Different types of kernel images](https://lpic2book.github.io/src/lpic2.201.1/#different-types-of-kernel-images).

After the compile process the kernel image can be found in the
`/usr/src/linux/arch/i386/boot` directory (on i386 systems).

###   make modules

The `modules` argument builds the modules; the device drivers and other
items that were configured as modules.

###   make modules_install

The `modules_install` argument installs the modules you just compiled
under `/lib/modules/`*kernel-version*. The *kernel-version* directory
will be created if nonexistent.

##  Installing the new kernel

When the new kernel has been compiled the system can be configured to
boot it.

First you need to put a copy of the new `bzImage` in the boot directory
(which should reside on its own boot partition). For clarity the name of
the kernel file should contain the kernel-version number, for example:
`vmlinuz-2.6.31`:

        # cp /usr/src/linux/arch/x86_64/boot/bzImage
        /boot/vmlinuz-2.6.31
                

This also ensures that you can have more than one kernel version in the
`/boot` directory, for example if you need to boot an older kernel due
to problems with the new one.

After moving the kernel file to the correct location, you will need to
configure the bootmanager (GRUB) so it will be able to boot the new
kernel.

For more specific information on GRUB, please refer to
[grub](#lpic2.202.grub).

##  The initial ram disk (`initrd`)

Say your bootdisk has the bootloader, kernel and proper modules on it.
Given the advantages of kernel modules you decided to use them. But if
you also want to use them for the boot device drivers, you face a
problem. GRUB will load the kernel, then execute it. The kernel will try
to access the disk to obtain the modules. However, as it has not loaded
the proper module yet, it can't access that disk and hangs.

A perfectly good solution would be to build a kernel with the required
disk-driver hardcoded into it. But if you have a larger number of
differing systems to maintain, you either need a personalised
configuration and kernel for each type of system or have to live with a
bloated kernel. To circumvent all of these problems, the kernel
developers came up with a solution: the `initrd` RAM disk.

A RAM disk is a chunk of memory that the kernel sees as if it were a
disk. It can be mounted like any other disk. The kernel supports RAM
disks by default. GRUB and LILO can handle RAM disks too. You can
instruct them to load the RAM disk from a file and when the kernel boots
it has the RAM disk readily available. Such RAM disks are often used to
hold scripts and modules to aid the boot process.

By convention the name of the image that holds the initial RAM disk is
`initrd`. The name is short for "initial ram disk".

The bootloader loads the `initrd`, it is mounted by the kernel as its
root filesystem. Once mounted as the root filesystem, programs can be
run from it and kernel modules loaded from it. After this step a new
root filesystem can be mounted from a different device. The previous
root (from `initrd`) is then either moved to the directory `/initrd` or
it is unmounted.

There are a number of ways to create your own `initrd` file. A very
convenient method, mainly used by Red Hat (based) distributions is by
using the `mkinitrd` script. It is a shell script which you might want
to inspect to see how it works. On Debian-based distributions a
utility named mkinitramfs `mkinitramfs` can be used for the same
purpose. You can also opt to build the file by hand, see the chapter
below.

###   Manual `initrd` creation

`initrd` files are compressed archives that contain the files of a
minimal root filesystem. This root filesystem normally contains modules,
scripts and some additional binaries required to allow the kernel to
properly continue its boot.

As said, the `mkinitrd` script offers a convenient way to build the
`initrd` file, however not all distributions provide it. If you want (or
must) build one by hand the steps are: create a root filesystem,
populate it with modules and files, create a `tar` or `cpio` archive
from it and lastly `gzip` it.

What type of archive to use depends on the distribution and kernel
version. Older kernels employ `tar`, newer use `cpio`. If you are unsure
and have a `initrd` at hand that came with your distribution, you may
use a command sequence like the one below to check:

        $ sudo zcat /boot/initrd-2.6.18-348.6.1.el5.img |file -
        /dev/stdin: ASCII cpio archive (SVR4 with no CRC)
                

The example above shows the output of a CentOS 5 distribution that uses
`cpio` as its archiving tool.

To be able to work with the `initrd` images, the kernel has to be
compiled with support for the RAM disk and configured such that it will
use it. Whatever you put on the initial RAM disk, it should be
compatible with the kernel and architecture you will use. For example,
your boot kernel should be able to recognize the filesystem type used in
the image and the modules you include should match the boot kernel
version.

The next step is to actually create the RAM disk image. First create a
filesystem on a block device and then copy the files to that filesystem
as needed. Suitable block devices to be used for this purpose are:

1.  A RAM disk (fast, allocates physical memory)

2.  A loopback device (slightly slower, allocates disk space)

In the rest of this example we will use the RAM disk method, so we will
need to make sure a RAM disk device node is present (there may be more
than one):

        # ls -la /dev/ram0
        brw-rw---- 1 root disk 1,  0 Feb 13 00:18 /dev/ram0 
                

**Note**
The number of RAM disks that is available by default on a system is an
option in the kernel configuration: CONFIG\_BLK\_DEV\_RAM\_COUNT.

Next an empty filesystem needs to be created of the appropriate size:

        # mke2fs -m0 /dev/ram0 300
                

**Note**
If space is critical, you may wish to use a filesystem which is more
efficient with space, such as the Minix FS. Remember that the
boot-kernel will need built-in support for whatever filesystem you
choose.

After having created the filesystem, you need to mount it on the
appropriate directory:

        # mount -t ext2 /dev/ram0 /mnt
                

Now the stub for the console device needs to be created. This will be
the device node that will be used when the `initrd` is active.

        # mkdir /mnt/dev
        # mknod /mnt/dev/tty1 c 4 1
                

Next, copy all files you think are necessary to the image; modules,
scripts, binaries, it does not matter. Refer to
[???](#minimal.dirs.needed) for an example of the directories and files
needed at minimum. One of the most important files to copy over is
`/linuxrc`. Whenever the kernel is set up to use a `initrd` image it
will search for a file `/linuxrc` and execute it. It can be a
script or a compiled binary. Hence, what will happen after mounting your
image file is totally under your control. In this example we will make
`/linuxrc` a link to `/bin/sh`. Make sure `/linuxrc` is given execute
permissions.

        # ln -s /bin/sh /mnt/linuxrc
                

After you have completed copying the files and have made sure that the
`/linuxrc` has the correct attributes, you can unmount the RAM disk
image:

        # umount /dev/ram0
                

The RAM disk image can then be copied to a file:

        # dd if=/dev/ram0 bs=1k count=300 of=/boot/initrd
                

Finally, if you have no more use for the RAM disk and you wish to
reclaim the memory, deallocate the RAM disk:

        # freeramdisk /dev/ram0
                

To test the newly created `initrd`, add a new section to your GRUB
menufile, which refers to the `initrd` image you've just created:

        title=initrd test entry
        root (hd0,0)
        kernel /vmlinuz-2.6.28
        initrd /initrd
                

If you have followed the steps above and have rebooted using this test
entry from the bootloader menu, the system will continue to boot. After
a few seconds you should find yourself at a command prompt, since
`/linuxrc` refers to `/bin/sh`, a shell.

Of course, real `initrd` files will contain a more complex `/linuxrc`
boot file, that loads modules, mounts the real root filesystem etc.

# Patching a Kernel {#kernelpatching}


**Note**
This section offers information on a subject that is no longer part of
the LPIC-2 objectives. It is maintained because it still contains valid
and valuable information.

In older versions of the LPIC-2 objectives candidates were assumed to be
able to properly patch the source code of a kernel to add support for
new hardware. The objectives included being able to remove kernel
patches from patched kernels.

Key files, terms and utilities include:

-   Kernel Makefiles

-   `patch`

-   `xz`

A patch file contains a list of differences between two versions of a
file. The standard command `diff` is capable of producing such lists.
The command `patch` can be used to apply the contents of a patch file to
update the file from the old version to a newer version.

Patching the kernel is very straightforward:

1.  Place patch file in the `/usr/src` directory.

2.  Change directory to `/usr/src`.

3.  Uncompress the patch file using `unxz`

4.  Use the `patch` utility to apply the patch file to the kernel
    source:

            # patch -p1 <patchfile
                                

5.  Check for failures.

6.  Build the kernel.

If the `patch` utility is unable to apply a part of a patch, it puts
that part in a reject file. The name of a reject file is the name of the
output file plus a `.rej` suffix, or a `#` if the addition of `.rej`
would generate a filename that is too long. In case even the addition of
a mere `#` would result in a filename that is too long, the last
character of the filename is replaced with a `#`.

The common options for the `patch` utility: patch

-p`number`; `--strip=number`

-   patch-p patch\--strip Strip the smallest prefix containing `number`
    leading slashes from each file name found in the patch file. A
    sequence of one or more adjacent slashes is counted as a single
    slash. This controls how file names found in the patch file are
    treated, in case you keep your files in a different directory than
    the person who sent out the patch. For example, supposing the file
    name in the patch file was `/u/howard/src/blurfl/blurfl.c`, then
    using `-p0` gives the entire file name unmodified, while using `-p1`
    gives `u/howard/src/blurfl/blurfl.c`.

`-s`; `--silent`; `--quiet`

-   patch-s patch\--silent patch\--quiet Work silently (suppress
    output), unless an error occurs.

`-E`; `--remove-empty-files`

-   patch-E patch\--remove-empty-files Remove output files that are
    empty after the patches have been applied. Normally this option is
    unnecessary, since patch can examine the time stamps on the header
    to determine whether a file should exist after patching. However, if
    the input is not a context diff or if patch conforms to the POSIX
    specification, patch does not remove empty patched files unless this
    option is given. When patch removes a file, it also attempts to
    remove any empty ancestor directories.

`-R`; `--reverse`

-   patch-R patch\--reverse Assume that this patch was created with the
    old and new files reversed, so that you are basically applying the
    patch to the file which already contains the modifications in the
    patch file. The `patch` will attempt to swap each hunk around before
    applying it and rejects will come out in the swapped format. The
    `-R` option does not work with `ed` diff scripts because there is
    too little information to reconstruct the reverse operation. If the
    first hunk of a `patch` fails, `patch` reverses the hunk to see if
    it can be applied that way. If it can, you are asked if you want to
    have the `-R` option set. If it can't, the patch continues to be
    applied normally.

    **Note**
    This method cannot detect a reversed patch if it is a normal diff
    and if the first command is an append (i.e. it should have been a
    delete) since appends always succeed. This is due to the fact that a
    null context matches anywhere. Luckily, most patches add or change
    lines rather than delete them, so most reversed normal diffs begin
    with a delete, which fails, triggering the heuristic.
    :::

For more information consult the man-pages of the `diff` command and the
`patch` command.

Removing a kernel patch from a production kernel

removing a patch

A kernel patch can be removed from a production kernel by removing it
from the production kernel source tree and compiling a new kernel. In
the previous topic we've learned that to remove a patch from a file,
you either need to apply it again, or run `patch` with the `-R`
parameter:

        # patch -p1<patch-2.6.28
        patching file linux/Documentation/Configure.help
        Reversed (or previously applied) patch detected! Assume -R? [n] y
            

# DKMS

\$ DKMS (Dynamic Kernel Module Support) was developed by Dell in 2003.
DKMS was created as a solution to combat software problems caused by the
dependencies between kernels and kernel modules. As a vendor of computer
systems running (amongst others) Linux operating systems, Dell offered
software support to customers. When customers would upgrade the Linux
kernel, the kernel modules had to be upgraded as well. And whenever Dell
released newer versions of kernel modules for hardware support, these
modules had to match the Linux kernel in use.

DKMS is a framework, capable of automatically compiling and/or
installing kernel modules for every kernel version available on the
system. DKMS achieves this functionality by seperating the kernel module
files or sources from the actual kernel source tree. This way, both the
kernel and kernel modules may be upgraded independent of each other.
Major Linux distributions offer the DKMS framework through their package
system. When the kernel is upgraded by the package manager software on a
system running DKMS, a hook will take care of deciding whether any kernel
modules need to be compiled and/or installed for the new kernel. The
other way around, new kernel modules can be compiled and/or installed by
DKMS without requirements towards the kernel version.

DKMS does have a few requirements in order to function properly. The
software dependencies are dependant on the Linux distribution in use.
But one requirement that is uniform across all distributions is the
necessity for kernel header files. The headers for the running kernel
version can be installed using the following package manager commands:

On Red Hat based Linux distributions:

        $  yum install kernel-devel
                

On Debian-based Linux distributions:

                    $ apt-get install linux-headers-$(uname -r)
                

Due to the adoption of DKMS amongst major Linux distributions, many
kernel modules available through package managers are (also) available
as DKMS-modules. On Debian-based Linux systems, these DKMS kernel
modules can be identified by their naming convention. The package names
for these files end in `-dkms`. For example: `oss4-dkms`. After
installation of these packages, the kernel module source files are
placed within a corresponding `/usr/src/module-version` directory
together with a `dkms.conf` configuration file. Whenever a kernel or
kernel module change triggers the DKMS system, the directory specified
by the `source_tree` variable from `/etc/dkms/framework.conf` will be
checked for the existence of subdirectories containing `dkms.conf`
files. The contents of these `dkms.conf` files then determine what
happens next. The following example comes from a Debian-based Linux
system and should clarify this explanation:

        $ sudo apt-get install flashcache-dkms
        $ ls /usr/src/
        flashcache-3.1.1+git20140801  linux-headers-3.16.0-4-amd64  linux-headers-3.16.0-4-common  linux-kbuild-3.16 
        $ ls /usr/src/flashcache-3.1.1+git20140801/
        dkms.conf          flashcache.h        flashcache_ioctl.h  flashcache_procfs.c   flashcache_subr.c
        flashcache_conf.c  flashcache_ioctl.c  flashcache_main.c   flashcache_reclaim.c  Makefile
        $ cat /usr/src/flashcache-3.1.1+git20140801/dkms.conf 
        BUILT_MODULE_NAME="flashcache"
        DEST_MODULE_LOCATION="/kernel/drivers/block"
        PACKAGE_NAME="flashcache"
        PACKAGE_VERSION="3.1.1+git20140801"
        AUTOINSTALL="yes"
        REMAKE_INITRD="yes"
        MAKE="COMMIT_REV=3.1.1+git20140801 KERNEL_TREE=$kernel_source_dir make modules"
                

`BUILT_MODULE_NAME` determines the name of the compiled module. This
directive is mandatory if the DKMS-module package contains more than one
module. `DEST_MODULE_LOCATION` determines the location for the compiled
module. The value for this directive should always start with "/kernel"
which in turn redirects to `/lib/modules/kernelversion/kernel`. This
value is mandatory except for the following Linux distributions which
use a distribution specific directory: Fedora Core 6 and higher, RHEL 5
and higher, Novell SuSE Linux ES 10 and higher and Ubuntu.
`PACKAGE_NAME` determines the name associated with the entire package of
modules. This directive is mandatory. `PACKAGE_VERSION` determines the
version associated with the entire package of modules and is mandatory.
`AUTOINSTALL` is a boolean value that determines whether or not the
`dkms_autoinstaller` service will try to install this module for every
kernel the system boots in to. `REMAKE_INITRD` determines whether the
`initrd` image should be generated again after this module is installed.
The value of this directive defaults to "no". When configuring a value,
know that all characters after the first character are discared. The
first character is only interpreted if it is a "y" or "Y". `MAKE` is one
of many directives that stores its value in to an array. The `MAKE`
value determines the build options. When not defined, DKMS will try to
build the module using a generic `MAKE` command.

On Debian-based Linux distributions, the directory
`/usr/share/doc/dkms/examples` holds example configuration files. On Red
Hat based Linux systems, example files can be found within the
`/usr/share/doc/dkms` directory.

After a module is built by DKMS, it is part of an extensible framework.
DKMS provides several commands to issue on the module. Covering all
these commands reaches beyond the scope of this book. But apart from
`man dkms` the `dkms` command should be familiar. The `dkms` command
makes it possible to `add` or `remove` modules to or from the source
tree. Once part of the source tree, modules may be `build`. After
building, a module may be installed onto the kernel it was build for
using the `install` option. `uninstall` reverts this process. The
`status` option prints information about added modules to standard
output.

The example above uses a module from the package manager. DKMS is also
capable of accepting archive formats containing binary modules, module
sources or both. When adding modules to DKMS this way it is important
that the archive also contains a valid `dkms.conf` file. Using the
`dkms mktarball` command, such an archive can be created based on
modules extracted from the current system. This tarball archive can then
be imported to the source tree using the `dkms ldtarball` command.

##  Dracut

Just like DKMS may be configured to behave as an event-driven tool,
`dracut` can behave in a similar way. Instead of compiling kernel
modules, `dracut` can take care of generating a new `initramfs` image
whenever there seems a need to do so.
