##  Advanced Network Configuration and Troubleshooting (205.2)

The candidate should be able to configure a network device to implement
various network authentication schemes. This objective includes
configuring a multi-homed network device, configuring a virtual private
network and resolving networking and communication problems.


###   Key Knowledge Areas

-   Utilities to manipulate routing tables

-   Utilities to configure and manipulate ethernet network interfaces

-   Utilities to analyse the status of the network devices

-   Utilities to monitor and analyse the TCP/IP traffic

####  Terms and Utilities

-   `/sbin/route`

-   `/sbin/ifconfig`

-   `/bin/netstat`

-   `/bin/ping`

-   `/bin/ping6`

-   `/usr/sbin/traceroute`

-   `/usr/sbin/traceroute6`

-   `/usr/sbin/arp`

-   `/usr/sbin/tcpdump`

-   `/usr/sbin/lsof`

-   `/usr/sbin/ss`

-   `/usr/bin/nc`

-   `/usr/bin/mtr`

-   `/sbin/ip`

-   `nmap`

-   `wireshark`

###  Virtual Private Network

####  What Is A VPN

A VPN (Virtual Private Network) allows you to connect VPN two or more
remote networks securely over an insecure connection, for example over
the public Internet. To do this an encrypted *secure tunnel* is created:
all data will be encrypted before being tunnel sent over the insecure
network. The resulting network connection acts and feels like a physical
connection, but actually may traverse many physical networks and
systems. Hence its name: \"virtual\".

VPNs are frequently used to save costs. In olden days physical
connections had to be leased from telecom providers or you had to use
POTS or ISDN lines. This was a costly business. Nowadays the Internet is
omnipresent, and almost always available at a low fixed monthly price.
However, the Internet can be sniffed and intruders might inspect and/or
intercept your traffic. A VPN shields you from most of the problems you
might have otherwise.

A use case might be to integrate LANs in several offices or branches. A
user that works in the Los Angeles office hence can access the network
services of the department in New York vice versa. In most cases,
offices already have an Internet connection, so no additional
investments need to be made.

####  VPN Types

There are many ways to implement a VPN, although most solutions either
use IPSEC or SSL/TLS as their basis for encryption. Some companies use
proprietary software implementations. Many routers have IPSEC based VPN
support built in. A usable VPN can be built using a simple SSH SSH
tunnel or by using a more sophisticated dedicated solution. Some VPN
implementations include:

-   IPSEC

-   VPND

-   SSH

-   Many Cisco Routers (or other proprietary implementations)

-   SSL/TLS

This book will outline the implementations of OpenVPN and IPSEC.
[???](#openvpn) is covered separately in the chapter on System Security.
IPSEC

####  IPSEC

IPSEC provides encryption and authentication services at the IP
(Internet Protocol) level of the IPSEC network protocol stack. It
replaces/enhances the regular level 3 IP layer so all packets are
encrypted, including for example UDP packets. The IPSEC layer has been
standardized by the IETF in RFCs 2401--2412. Implementing IPSEC is an
option for IPv4 but is mandatory in IPv6 stacks.

In a regular IPv4 network you might set up dedicated IPSEC gateway
machines to provide encrypted IP network connections when needed. IPSEC
can run on routers, firewall machines, various application servers and
on end-user desktop or laptop machines - any system that has an IP
stack.

Using IPSEC is simple, as the protocol is built-in into the IP stack.
But there are additional tasks in comparison with a regular IPv4
connection, for example encryption keys need to be exchanged between the
end-points before an encrypted tunnel can be set up. It was decided to
handle this over a higher-level protocol, the Internet Key Exchange
protocol IKE (IKE). After IKE has done its work, the IP level services
ESP and AH know which keys to use to do their work. ESPAH

The full names of the three protocols that are used in an IPSEC
implementation are:

ESP, Encapsulating Security Payload

-   Encrypts and/or authenticates data;

AH, Authentication Header

-   Provides a packet authentication service;

IKE, Internet Key Exchange

-   Negotiates connection parameters, including keys, for the protocols
    mentioned above. The IKE protocol ensures authentication of the
    peers and exchange of their symmetric keys. The IKE protocol is
    usually implemented by a user space daemon that uses port 500/udp.

**Note**
IPSEC standards define all three protocols, but in some contexts people
use the term IPSEC to refer to just AH and ESP.


OpenSwan, formerly known as FreeS/WAN, is a complete IPSEC
implementation for Linux 2.0 - 2.6 kernels. StrongSwan (also derived
from FreeS/WAN) is another implementation that also supports the 3.x
kernel. Both OpenSwan and FreeSwan implement all three protocols
mentioned earlier. The Openswan Openswan implementation has several main
parts:

-   KLIPS (KerneL IPSec) which implements generic IPSEC packet handling,
    AH and ESP on the kernel level, for all kernels before version
    2.5.47. KLIPS has been superseded by native IPSEC kernel support
    (NETKEY).

-   NETKEY is the Kernel IPSec implementation included with the 2.6
    kernel.

-   Pluto (an IKE daemon) implements IKE, negotiating connections with
    other systems.

-   various scripts provide an administrator interface to the machinery.

<!-- FIXME: path to config file -->

####  The config file 

The config file contains three parts:

- one or more connection specifications

    -   Each connection section starts with `conn ident`, where `ident` is
    an arbitrary name which is used to identify the connection.

- connection defaults

    -   This section starts with `conn %default`. For each parameter in it,
    any section which does not have a parameter of the same name gets a
    copy of the one from the `%default` section. There may be multiple
    %default sections, but only one default may be supplied for any
    specific parameter name and all `%default` sections must precede all
    non-`%default` sections of that type.

- the config section

    -   The config section starts with `config 
                                        setup` and contains information
    used Configuring Openswan when starting the software.

A sample configuration file is shown below:

        # basic configuration
        config setup
                interfaces="ipsec0=eth0"
                klipsdebug=none
                plutodebug=none
                plutoload=%search
                plutostart=%search
                # Close down old connection when new one using same ID shows up.
                uniqueids=yes

        # defaults that apply to all connection descriptions
        conn %default
                # How persistent to be in (re)keying negotiations (0 means very).
                keyingtries=0
                # How to authenticate gateways
                authby=rsasig

        # VPN connection for head office and branch office
        conn head-branch
                # identity we use in authentication exchanges
                leftid=@head.example.com
                leftrsasigkey=0x175cffc641f...
                left=45.66.9.170
                leftnexthop=45.66.11.254
                leftsubnet=192.168.11.0/24
                # right s.g., subnet behind it, and next hop to reach left
                rightid=@branch.example.com
                rightrsasigkey=0xfc641fd6d9a24...
                right=17.120.138.134
                rightnexthop=17.120.138.1
                rightsubnet=192.168.0.0/24
                # start automatically when ipsec is loaded
                auto=start
                        

In a typical setup you have two interconnected gateways that both run
IPSEC and route packets. One of these gateways can be seen as 'the one
on the left', the other as 'the one on the right'. Hence
specifications are written in terms of `left` and `right` participants.
There is no special meaning attached to either name, they are just
labels - you might have defined the 'left' host to be the 'right'
host and vice versa.

Normally, you would use the exact same configuration file on both sides.
Interpretation of that file is done by checking the local configuration.
For example if it was stated in the configuration file that the IP
address for 'left' is 1.2.3.4, the software assumes that it runs on
the left node if it finds that IP address configured on one of its
network devices. The same file is interpreted differently on the other
node, as that hosts configuration differs.

The `left`, `leftsubnet` and `leftnexthop` (and the `right...`
counterparts) determine the layout of the connection:

![](images/205-vpnhops.dot.svg.jpg)

The `leftid` and `leftrsasigkey` are used in authenticating the left
participant. The `leftrsasigkey` is the public key of the left
participant (in the example above the RSA keys are shortened for easy
display). The private key is stored in the `/etc/ipsec.secrets` file and
should be kept secure.

The keys can be generated on both client and server with the command:

        # ipsec rsasigkey --verbose 2048 > rsa.key
                        

The IKE-daemon of IPSEC is called `pluto`. It will authenticate and
negotiate the secure tunnels. Once the connections is set up, the kernel
implementation of IPSEC routes traffic through the tunnel if need be.

`plutoload=%search` and `plutostart=%search` tell the `pluto` daemon to
search the configuration file for `auto=` statements. All connections
with `auto=add` will be loaded in the pluto database. Connections with
`auto=start` will also be started.

Troubleshooting

Network troubleshooting is a very broad subject with thousands of tools
available. There are some very good books available on this topic, so we
will limit our discussion to an overview of some of the tools which can
be used to solve or detect network problems.

###   ifconfig

Typing `ifconfig` without additional parameters displays the
configuration for all network interfaces ifconfig on the system. You
might use this command to verify the configuration of an interface if
the user experiences connectivity problems, particularly when their
system has just been (re)configured.

When `ifconfig` is entered with an interface name and no other
arguments, it displays the current values assigned to that particular
interface. For example, checking interface `eth0` system gives this
report:

        $ ifconfig eth0
        eth0      Link encap:Ethernet  HWaddr 00:10:60:58:05:36  
                  inet addr:192.168.2.3  Bcast:192.168.2.255  Mask:255.255.255.0
                  UP BROADCAST RUNNING MULTICAST  MTU:1500  Metric:1
                  RX packets:1398185 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0
                  TX packets:1411351 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0
                  collisions:829 txqueuelen:100 
                  RX bytes:903174205 (861.3 Mb)  TX bytes:201042106 (191.7 Mb)
                  Interrupt:11 Base address:0xa000 
                    

The ifconfig command displays a few lines of output. The third line of
the display shows the characteristics of the interface. Check for these
characteristics:

UP

-   The interface is enabled for use. If the interface is "down", bring
    the interface "up" with the `ifconfig` command (e.g.
    `ifconfig eth0 up`).

RUNNING

-   This interface is operational. If the interface is not "running",
    the driver for this interface may not be properly installed.

The second line of `ifconfig` output shows the IP address, the subnet
mask and the broadcast address. Check these three fields to make sure
the network interface is properly configured.

Two common interface configuration problems are misconfigured subnet
masks and incorrect IP addresses. A bad subnet mask may be the case when
the host can reach some hosts on its local subnet but is unable to reach
other hosts, even if they are on the same subnet. `ifconfig` quickly
reveals if a bad subnet mask is set.

An incorrectly set IP address can be a subtle problem. If the network
part of the address is incorrect, every `ping` will fail with the "no
answer" ping error; because the IP address is unfamiliar to the other
hosts on the network, return packets will be directed to their default
gateway (often leading to the internet) or even dropped. In this case,
using `ifconfig` may reveal the incorrect address. However, if the host
part of the address is wrong, the problem can be more difficult to
detect. A small system, such as a PC that only connects out to other
systems and never accepts incoming connections, can run for a long time
with the wrong address without its user noticing the problem.
Additionally, the system that suffers the ill effects may not be the one
that is misconfigured. It is possible for someone to accidentally use
your IP address on his own system and for his mistake to cause
intermittent communication problems to your system. This type of
configuration error cannot be discovered by `ifconfig`, because the
error is on a remote host. IP conflicts like this can be discovered
using the `arp` command, which will show two alternating MAC addresses
for the same IP address. arp

The `ifconfig` command can be used to set up multihomed network device.
There are two ways a host can be multihomed.

- Two Or More Interfaces To The Same Network
    - Devices such as servers or
high-powered workstations may be equipped with two physical interfaces
to the same network for performance and/or reliability reasons. They
will have two IP addresses on the same network with the same network ID.

- Interfaces To Two Or More Different Networks
    - Devices may have multiple
interfaces to different networks. The IP addresses will typically have
different network IDs in them.

###   ping and ping6

ping6 The basic format of the ping or ping6 command on a Linux system
is:

        $ ping [-c count] host
        $ ping6 [-c count] host
                    

host

-   The hostname or IP address of the remote host being tested. Note
    that you cannot ping from an IPv4 host to an IPv6 host or vice
    versa. Both ends need to use the same IP version.

count

-   The number of packets to be sent in the test. Use the count field
    and set the value low. Otherwise, the ping command will continue to
    send test packets until you interrupt it, usually by pressing
    [CTRL+C]{.keycombo} (\^C).

To check that www.sue.nl can be reached from your workstation, send four
packets with the following command.

        $ ping -c 4 www.sue.nl
        PING home.NL.net (193.67.79.250): 56 data bytes
        64 bytes from 193.67.79.250: icmp_seq=0 ttl=245 time=32.1 ms
        64 bytes from 193.67.79.250: icmp_seq=1 ttl=245 time=32.1 ms
        64 bytes from 193.67.79.250: icmp_seq=2 ttl=245 time=37.6 ms
        64 bytes from 193.67.79.250: icmp_seq=3 ttl=245 time=34.1 ms

        --- home.NL.net ping statistics ---
        4 packets transmitted, 4 packets received, 0% packet loss
        round-trip min/avg/max = 32.1/33.9/37.6 ms
                    

This test shows a good wide-area network link to www.sue.nl with no
packet loss and fast response. A small packet loss, and a round-trip
time an order of magnitude higher, would not be abnormal for a
connection made across a wide-area network. The statistics displayed by
the ping command can indicate a low-level network problem. The key
statistics are:

-   The sequence in which the packets are arriving, as shown by the ICMP
    sequence number (icmp\_seq) displayed ICMP for each packet;

-   How long it takes a packet to make the round trip, displayed in
    milliseconds after the string time=;

-   The percentage of packets lost, displayed in a summary line at the
    end of the ping output.

If the packet loss is high, the response time is very high or packets
are arriving out of order, there could be a network hardware or link
problem. If you see these conditions when communicating over great
distances on a wide area network, there is nothing to worry about.
TCP/IP was designed to deal with unreliable networks, and some wide-area
networks suffer from a moderate level of packet loss. But if these
problems are seen on a local-area network, they indicate trouble.

On a local-network cable segment, the round-trip time should be close to
zero; there should be little or no packet loss and the packets should
arrive in order. If these conditions are not met, there is a problem
with the network hardware or with the links connecting them. On an
Ethernet, the problem could be improper cable termination, a bad cable
segment or a bad piece of "active" hardware, such as a hub, switch or
transceiver.

The results of a simple ping test, even if the ping is successful, can
help direct you to further testing toward the most likely causes of the
problem. But other diagnostic tools are needed to examine the problem
more closely and find the underlying cause.

###   route

To check the routing of a linux box, the `route` command is usually
entered with no route parameters or with `-n` to turn off ip-address to
name resolution. For example `route -n` might show:

        $ route -n
        Kernel IP routing table
        Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface
        192.168.11.0    0.0.0.0         255.255.255.0   U     0      0        0 eth0
        145.66.8.0      0.0.0.0         255.255.252.0   U     0      0        0 eth1
        0.0.0.0         145.66.11.254   0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 eth1
                    

This host has two interfaces, one on subnet 192.168.11.0/24 the other on
subnet 145.66.8.0/22. There is also a default route out on `eth1` to
145.66.11.254 (denoted by the `G` under "Flags" and a "Destination" and
"Genmask" of 0.0.0.0).

To be able to troubleshoot this information you need to know what the
routing should be, perhaps by saving the routing information when the
system is known to work.

The two most common mistakes are:

-   No network entry for an interface. When a network interface is
    configured a routing entry should be automatically added. This
    informs the kernel about the network that can be reached through the
    interface.

-   No default route (or two default routes). There should be exactly
    one default route. Note that two default gateways can go undetected
    for a long time because the routing could "accidentally" use the
    proper gateway.

In general, if there is a routing problem, it is better to first locate
the part of the network where the problem originates, e.g. with `ping`
or `traceroute`{#tracertmc} and then use traceroute `route` as part of
the diagnostics.

###   traceroute

`traceroute` and `traceroute6` are tools used to discover the gateways
along a path. Path discovery is an essential step in diagnosing routing
problems. Note that `traceroute6` is equivalent to `traceroute -6`

The `traceroute` command is based on a clever use of the Time-To-Live
(TTL) field in the IP packet's TTL header. The TTL field is used to
limit the lifetime of a packet. When a router fails or is misconfigured,
a routing loop or circular path may result. The TTL field prevents
packets from remaining on a network indefinitely should such a routing
loop occur. A packet's TTL field is decremented each time the packet
crosses a router on its way through a network. When its value reaches 0,
the packet is discarded rather than forwarded. When discarded, an ICMP
TIME\_EXCEEDED TIME\_EXCEEDED message is sent back to the packet's
source to inform the source that the packet was discarded. By
manipulating the TTL field of the original packet, the program
`traceroute` uses information from these ICMP messages to discover paths
through a network.

`traceroute` sends a series of UDP packets with the destination address
of the device you want a path to. By default, `traceroute` sends sets of
three packets to discover each hop. traceroute sets the TTL field in the
first three packets to a value of 1 so that they are discarded by the
first router on the path. When the ICMP TIME\_EXCEEDED messages are
returned by that router, `traceroute` records the source IP address of
these ICMP messages. This is the IP address of the first hop on the
route to the destination.

Next, three packets are sent with their TTL field set to 2. These will
be discarded by the second router on the path. The ICMP messages
returned by this router reveal the IP address of the second router on
the path. The program proceeds in this manner until a set of packets
finally has a TTL value large enough so that the packets reach their
destination. Most implementations of `traceroute` default to trying only
30 hops before halting.

An example traceroute on linux looks like this:

        $ traceroute vhost2.cistron.net
        traceroute to vhost2.cistron.net (195.64.68.36), 30 hops max, 38 byte packets
         1  gateway.kabel.netvisit.nl (145.66.11.254)  56.013 ms  19.120 ms  12.642 ms
         2  145.66.3.45 (145.66.3.45)  138.138 ms  28.482 ms  28.788 ms
         3  asd-dc2-ias-ar10.nl.kpn.net (194.151.226.2)  102.338 ms  240.596 ms  253.462 ms
         4  asd-dc2-ipc-dr03.nl.kpn.net (195.190.227.242)  95.325 ms  76.738 ms  97.651 ms
         5  asd-dc2-ipc-cr01.nl.kpn.net (195.190.232.206)  61.378 ms  60.673 ms  75.867 ms
         6  asd-sara-ipc-dr01.nl.kpn.net (195.190.233.74)  111.493 ms  96.631 ms  77.398 ms
         7  asd-sara-ias-pr10.nl.kpn.net (195.190.227.6)  78.721 ms  95.029 ms  82.613 ms
         8  ams-icr-02.carrier1.net (212.4.192.60)  90.179 ms  80.634 ms  112.130 ms
         9  212.4.192.21 (212.4.192.21)  49.521 ms  80.354 ms  63.503 ms
        10  212.4.194.42 (212.4.194.42)  94.528 ms  60.698 ms  103.550 ms
        11  vhost2.cistron.net (195.64.68.36)  102.057 ms  62.515 ms  66.637 ms
                    

Again, knowing what the route through your network should be helps to
localize the problem. Note that not all network problems can be detected
with a `traceroute`, because of some complicating factors. First, the
router at some hop may not return ICMP TIME\_EXCEEDED messages. Second,
some older routers may incorrectly forward packets even though the TTL
is 0. A third possibility is that ICMP messages may be given low
priority and may not be returned in a timely manner. Finally, beyond
some point of the path, ICMP packets may be filtered by a firewall.

The `traceroute` command is a great tool to narrow down the possible
causes of a network problem.

###   arp and arpwatch

`arp` is used to manipulate the kernel's arp arpwatch ARP cache. The
primary options are clearing an address mapping entry and manually
setting one up. For debugging purposes, the `arp` program also allows a
complete dump of the ARP cache. ARPcache

If you know what the MAC address of a specific host should be, the dump
may be used to determine a duplicate IP-address, but running `arpwatch`
on a central system might prove more effective.

IP address conflicts are often the result of configuration errors
including:

-   assignment of the same static IP address by a network administrator

-   assignment of a static IP address within a DHCP range (dynamic
    range) resulting in the same address being automatically assigned by
    the local DHCP server

-   an error in the DHCP server

-   a system coming back online after an extended period in stand-by or
    hibernate mode with an IP address that has been reassigned and is in
    use on the network.

Detection of duplicate IP addresses can be very hard even with
`arpwatch`. IP address conflicts occur when two devices on a network are
assigned the same IP address, resulting in one or both being disabled
and losing connectivity until the conflict is resolved.

If, for example, a rogue host rogue host uses the IP address of the host
running the `arpwatch` program or never communicates with it, a
duplicate IP address will go unnoticed. Still, `arpwatch` is a very
useful tool in detecting networking problems.

`arpwatch` keeps track of ethernet/IP address pairings. Changes are
reported via syslog and e-mail.

`arpwatch` will report a "changed ethernet address" when a known IP
address shows up with a new ethernet address. When the old ethernet
address suddenly shows up again, a "flip flop" is reported.

###   tcpdump

`tcpdump` is a program that enables network tcpdump administrators to
inspect every packet going through the network in real-time. This tool
is typically used to monitor active connections or troubleshoot
occasional network connectivity problems. In order to see traffic,
however, the host running `tcpdump` must be somewhere along the path
between two (or more) hosts exchanging traffic. This may prove to be
difficult in a fully switched network. An easy solution is to run
tcpdump on the host that needs to send or receive traffic. Another
option is to configure a port on one of the switches where a copy of
traffic from certain source and destination ports is sent; this is
called a SPAN port.

`tcpdump` can generate a lot of output, so it is useful to narrow the
scope of packets captured by specifying the interface you want to listen
on using `-i`. In addition, you can specify the source, destination,
protocol type and/or port number of the traffic you want to see joined
by boolean AND and OR statements if necessary. An example command could
be: `tcpdump -i eth0 src 10.10.0.1 and dst 10.10.0.254
                and tcp port 80`). Other useful options are `-n` to turn
of name resolution and `-w` to write captured packets to a file for
later inspection (e.g. in Wireshark).

###   nmap

`nmap` is a versatile tool for network exploration and security
auditing. Its main use is as a portscanner, which also can identify
running services, versions of the running services and OS types.

An example of this command and output is:

        $ nmap -A localhost

            Starting Nmap 7.60 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2020-05-08 12:56 CEST
    Nmap scan report for localhost (127.0.0.1)
    Host is up (0.00015s latency).
    Other addresses for localhost (not scanned): ::1
    Not shown: 994 closed ports
    PORT     STATE SERVICE  VERSION
    22/tcp   open  ssh      OpenSSH 7.6p1 Ubuntu 4ubuntu0.3 (Ubuntu Linux; protocol 2.0)
    | ssh-hostkey:
    |   2048 fc:4c:2d:44:51:30:9e:8a:56:0b:a9:29:fa:e3:d7:21 (RSA)
    |   256 83:bb:46:7c:fc:61:9a:61:26:25:87:89:1c:43:a6:6c (ECDSA)
    |_  256 bd:16:c8:7c:3e:29:00:6d:cc:79:d8:80:4a:92:0b:d7 (EdDSA)
    25/tcp   open  smtp     Postfix smtpd
    |_smtp-commands: oeboe.udonix.nl, PIPELINING, SIZE 10240000, ETRN, AUTH DIGEST-MD5 NTLM CRAM-MD5 LOGIN PLAIN, AUTH=DIGEST-MD5 NTLM CRAM-MD5 LOGIN PLAIN, ENHANCEDSTATUSCODES, 8BITMIME, DSN, SMTPUTF8,
    | smtp-ntlm-info:
    |_  Target_Name: OEBOE.UDONIX.NL
    111/tcp  open  rpcbind  2-4 (RPC #100000)
    | rpcinfo:
    |   program version   port/proto  service
    |   100000  2,3,4        111/tcp  rpcbind
    |   100000  2,3,4        111/udp  rpcbind
    |   100003  3           2049/udp  nfs
    |   100003  3,4         2049/tcp  nfs
    |   100005  1,2,3      42208/udp  mountd
    |   100005  1,2,3      48465/tcp  mountd
    |   100021  1,3,4      37657/tcp  nlockmgr
    |   100021  1,3,4      38288/udp  nlockmgr
    |   100227  3           2049/tcp  nfs_acl
    |_  100227  3           2049/udp  nfs_acl
    143/tcp  open  imap     Dovecot imapd (Ubuntu)
    |_imap-capabilities: SASL-IR more Pre-login post-login LITERAL+ IDLE listed capabilities ID have LOGIN-REFERRALS OK IMAP4rev1 AUTH=PLAINA0001 STARTTLS ENABLE
    | ssl-cert: Subject: commonName=oeboe.udonix.nl
    | Not valid before: 2018-06-23T13:16:13
    |_Not valid after:  2028-06-20T13:16:13
    |_ssl-date: TLS randomness does not represent time
    993/tcp  open  ssl/imap Dovecot imapd (Ubuntu)
    |_imap-capabilities: SASL-IR more IMAP4rev1 LITERAL+ IDLE post-login listed ID have LOGIN-REFERRALS Pre-login OK AUTH=PLAINA0001 capabilities ENABLE
    | ssl-cert: Subject: commonName=oeboe.udonix.nl
    | Not valid before: 2018-06-23T13:16:13
    |_Not valid after:  2028-06-20T13:16:13
    |_ssl-date: TLS randomness does not represent time
    2049/tcp open  nfs_acl  3 (RPC #100227)
    Service Info: Host: no; OS: Linux; CPE: cpe:/o:linux:linux_kernel

    Service detection performed. Please report any incorrect results at https://nmap.org/submit/ .
    Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 14.54 seconds
                

**Note**
Some of the `nmap` command options require root privileges, consult the
`NMAP(1)` manpage for more information

###   wireshark

Wireshark is an open source network protocol analyzer. It allows you to
examine data from a live network or from a capture file on disk. You can
interactively browse the capture data, delving down into just that level
of packet detail you need.

Wireshark has several powerful features, including a rich display filter
language and the ability to view the reconstructed stream of a TCP
session. It also supports hundreds of protocols and media types. A
tcpdump-like console version named tethereal is also included. One word
of caution is that Ethereal has suffered from dozens of remotely
exploitable security holes, so stay up-to-date and be wary of running it
with root privileges on untrusted or hostile networks (such as security
conferences).

###   lsof

The `lsof` command lists all open files on a system. Since Linux
treats everything as a file, it also shows open network sockets. It can
be used to find open ports on a system as well as determining the origin
of a network connection.

Options of the `lsof` used for network troubleshooting.

-i

-   List IP sockets. The `-i` option also takes arguments to restrict
    the sockets listed, like `-i` `tcp` or `-i` `192.168.1.2`.

-n

-   Do not resolve hostnames; can make `lsof` run faster.

-P

-   Do not resolve port names; can make `lsof` run faster.

+P

-   Resolve port name to protocol; default behaviour.

###   ss

The `ss` command can be used to investigate network sockets on a
system, similar to netstat.

Useful options of the `ss` for network troubleshooting include:

-a

-   List all sockets. This includes sockets in listening state.

-n

-   Do not resolve port names.

-l

-   Only display listening sockets.

-p

-   Show processes using the sockets

-t

-   Restrict output to TCP sockets

-u

-   Restrict output to UDP sockets

###   netstat

Like `lsof`, `netstat` is a program to list open ports on a
system. It looks for the standard ports, but it also finds custom ports
opened by applications, for instance `netcat`.

Frequently used options are:

-a

-   List all sockets.

-e

-   Extended mode.

-inet

-   List only IP connections

-l

-   Only show listening sockets

-n

-   Show IP numbers instead of resolving them to hostnames.

-p

-   Show the PID number and name of the process that is holding the
    socket.

-r

-   Show the kernel routing table. Is the same as the `route` command.

###   nc

`nc` is used for establishing TCP and UDP connections between
arbitrary ports on either end. After opening a port, it can listen for
input, which can be passed through to another command for further
processing. Note that you need to have administrative privileges on the
system you're running this command on for opening a listening port
below 1024. The command allows the user to set up, analyze and read
connections between systems. It is a very useful tool in the
troubleshooting toolbox. `nc` can be used to open up any port.

Because `nc` is capable of connecting and listening to any port it can
be used to transfer files between systems that lack Samba, FTP or SSH
etc.

if `nmap` is not available the `nc` command can be used to check for
open ports: Run nc command with -z flag. You need to specify host name /
ip along with the port range to limit and speedup operation. eg.

        # nc -z localhost 1-1023
                

###   mtr

The `mtr` command is extremely helpful for troubleshooting network problems,
because it combines the functionality of ping and traceroute. Rather
than provide a simple outline of the route that traffic takes across the
internet like traceroute, mtr collects additional information regarding
the state, connection, and responsiveness of the intermediate hosts.

`mtr` can be used without any options. Just type: `mtr>
                host` to get a visual display of the path between you
and the host and per-hop statistics. Like `ping`, `mtr` will continue to
send ICMP packets indefinitely by default. Useful options are:

-n

-   Do not reverse resolve IP addresses to hostnames

-c count

-   Send count number of probe packets, then stop

###   op

The `ip` command has already been discussed in the previous chapter.
