##  Logical Volume Manager (204.3)

Candidates should be able to create and remove logical volumes, volume
groups, and physical volumes. This objective includes snapshots and
resizing logical volumes.

###   Key Knowledge Areas

-   Tools in the LVM suite

-   Resizing, renaming, creating, and removing logical volumes, volume
    groups, and physical volumes

-   Creating and maintaining snapshots

-   Activating volume groups

###   Terms and Utilities

-   `/sbin/pv*`

-   `/sbin/vg*`

-   `/sbin/lv*`

-   `mount`

-   `/dev/mapper`

-   `lvm.conf`

###   Configuring Logical Volume Management

`lvm` is a logical volume manager for Linux. It enables you to
concatenate several physical volumes (hard disks etc.) to so-called
*volume groups*, forming a storage pool, much like a virtual disk. IDE
and SCSI disks, as well as multiple devices (MD) are supported.

In the figure below, the concepts and terminology used by `lvm` are
sketched. On the right side the names of the commands are shown that can
be used to create and/or manipulate the layer sketched on the left.

![](images/204-LVM.dot.svg.jpg)

####  The physical media / partitions

-   fdisk a hard disk, or a partition, e.g. `/dev/hda`, `/dev/hda6` or
    `/dev/sda`. You should set the partition types of the disk or
    partition to `0x8e`, which is "Linux LVM". Partitioning is done
    using `fdisk`. Please note that your version of `fdisk` may not yet
    know this type, so it will be listed as "Unknown". You can turn any
    consecutive number of blocks on a block device into a *Physical
    Volume*:

Physical Volume (PV)

-   Physical Volume a physical medium with some administrative data
    added to it. The command `pvcreate` can be used to add the
    administration onto the physical medium. The command `vgcreate` is
    used to create a volume group, which consists of one or more PV's.
    A PV that has been grouped in a volume group contains *Physical
    Extents*:

Physical Extents (PE)

-   Physical Extents Physical Extents are blocks of diskspace, often
    several megabytes in size. Using the command `lvcreate` you can
    assign PEs to a *Logical Volume*:

Logical Volume (LV)

-   Logical Volume A Logical Volume. On a logical volume we can use the
    command `mkfs` to get a *Filesystem*:

Filesystem

-   `ext2`, `ReiserFS`, `NWFS`, `XFS`, `JFX`, `NTFS` etc. mount To the
    linux kernel, there is no difference between a regular partition and
    a Logical Volume. A simple `mount` suffices to be able to use your
    logical volume.

lvcreate lvol Some examples of typical usage of the LVM commandset
follow. Initially, you need to set the partition type for the partitions
to use to create logical volumes to `0x8e`. Let's assume we have
partitions `/dev/hda4` and `/dev/hda5`, and they are set to the correct
partitioning type. To create a physical volume on both partitions (i.e.
to set up the volume group descriptor) you type (being the superuser):
pvcreate

        # pvcreate /dev/hda4 /dev/hda5
                

Now we have created two physical volumes. Next, we will create a volume
group. A volume group needs to have a name (we choose `volume01`). To
create our volume group, using our previously defined physical volumes,
type: vgcreate

        # vgcreate volume01 /dev/hda5 /dev/hda4 
                

The previous command line is the most basic form (refer to the manual
pages for a list of configurable parameters). This will create an array
of physical extents, by default they are 4 Mb in size. Using these
extents we can create one or more logical volumes, e.g:

        # lvcreate -L 100M volume01
                

This creates a logical volume with a default name choosen by
`lvcreate` and starts with the string `lvol` followed by a digit NDASH
let's assume `lvol0`. The logical volume will be created using the
volumegroup `volume01`. The name of the devicefile for this volume will
be `/dev/volume01/lvol0`. Next, we can make a filesystem on the
volumegroup, as usual, using `mkfs`, e.g. an `xfs` filesystem: mkfs
mount

        # mkfs -t xfs /dev/volume01/lvol0
                

The resulting filesystem can be mounted as usual:

        # mount /dev/volume01/lvol0 /mnt
                

####  Modifying logical volumes, volume groups and physical volumes

A logical volume can be modified in order to create more space for the
filesystem that is on top of this logical volume. Assuming that there is
enough space in the volume group a logical volume can be increased in
size with the command: lvextend

        # lvextend -L +50M /dev/volume01/lvol0
                

After the logical volume has been increased the filesystem on top of the
logical volume still has the same size. To use the extra space of the
logical volume the filesystem needs to be resized. This can be done by
the command: xfs\_grow

        # xfs_growfs /dev/volume01/lvol0
                

For an ext2/ext3/ext4 file system use the command `resize2fs`. Note that
for resizing the filesystem it must not be mounted.

In the previous example it was assumed that there was enough free space
in the volume group. If this is not the case, extra disk space can be
added to the volume group in a similar way. To do so use the command:
vgextend

        # vgextend volume01 /dev/hda6
                

First device hda6 has to be converted into a physical volume with the
command: pvcreate

        # pvcreate /dev/hda6
                

####  LVM Snapshots

snapshots One of the nicest features of LVM is the possibility of taking
snapshots of volumes. A snapshot is a virtual copy of the volume to
enable easy backups. LVM snapshots use a strategy called "copy on
write". This means that the snapshot logical volume only saves data
blocks from the original logical volume that are changed in the original
logical volume. To do so the logical volume manager first reads the
(unchanged) data block on the original and than writes the data block to
the snapshot. On filesystems with many changes (e.g. databases) this can
lead to performance issues.

The `-s` option in the `lvcreate` command specifies that the newly
created logical volume is a snapshot. lvcreate

        # lvcreate -L 50M -s -n snapshot0 /dev/volume01/lvol0
                

This will create a logical volume `/dev/volume01/snapshot0`, which then
can be used, among others, for backup purposes. The advantage of the
snapshot is that the data is consistent, i.e. the data doesn't change
during backup.

After the backup is finished, the snapshot has to be removed otherwise
the performance issues mentioned earlier will start to come into play.
To remove the snapshot use: lvremove

        # lvremove /dev/volume01/snapshot0
                

####  LVM commands

This section gives an overview of most lvm related commands. The manual
pages describe the commands more in detail.

`pvchange`
-   pvchange
    Change attributes of a physical volume

`pvck`
-   pvck
    Check physical volume metadata

`pvcreate`
-   pvcreate
    Initialize a disk or partition for use by LVM

`pvdisplay`
-   pvdisplay
    Display attributes of a physical volume

`pvmove`
-   pvmove
    Move physical extents

`pvremove`
-   pvremove
    Remove a physical volume

`pvs`
-   pvs
    Report information about physical volumes

`pvscan`
-   pvscan
    Scan all disk for physical volumes

`lvchange`
-   lvchange
    Change attributes for a logical volume

`lvcreate`
-   lvcreate
    Create a logical volume in an existing volume group

`lvdisplay`
-   lvdisplay
    Display attributes of a logical volumes

`lvextend`
-   lvextend
    Extend the size of a logical volume

`lvmdiskscan`
-   lvmdiskscan
    Scan for all devices visible to LVM2

`lvreduce`
-   lvmreduce
    Reduce the size of a logical volume

`lvremove`
-   lvmremove
    Remove a logical volume

`lvrename`
-   lvmrename
    Rename a logical volume

`lvresize`
-   lvmresize
    Resize a logical volume

`lvs`
-   lvs
    Report information about logical volumes

`lvscan`
-   lvscan
    Scan (all) disks for logical volumes

`vgcfgbackup`
-   vgcfgbackup
    Backup volume group descriptor area

`vgchange`
-   vgchange
    Change attributes of a volume group

`vgck`
-   vgck
    Check volume group metadata

`vgconvert`
-   vgconvert
    Convert volume group metadata

`vgcreate`
-   vgcreate
    Create a volume group

`vgdisplay`
-   vgdisplay
    Display attributes of volume groups

`vgextend`
-   vgextend
    Add physical volumes to a volume group

`vgexport`
-   vgexport
    Make volume groups unknown to the system

`vgimport`
-   vgimport
    Make exported volume groups known to the system

`vgmerge`
-   vgmerge
    Merge two volume groups

`vgmknodes`
-   vgmknodes
    Recreate volume group directory and logical volume special files

`vgreduce`
-   vgreduce
    Reduce a volume group

`vgremove`
-   vgremove
    Remove a volume group

`vgrename`
-   vgrename
    Rename a volume group

`vgs`
-   vgs
    Report information about volume groups

`vgscan`
-   vgscan
    Scan all disk for volume groups and rebuild caches

`vgsplit`
-   vgsplit
    Split a volume group into two

###   Device mapper

The device mapper is a kernel driver that provides a framework for
volume management. It provides a generic way of creating mapped devices,
which may be used as logical volumes. It does not specifically know
about volume groups or metadata formats.

LVM logical volumes are activated using the device mapper. Each logical
volume is translated into a mapped device. Each segment translates into
a line in the mapping table that describes the device. The device mapper
supports a variety of mapping targets, including linear mapping, striped
mapping, and error mapping.

####  lvm.conf

At system startup `lvm.conf` configuration is loaded. The default
directory is `/etc/lvm`. But it can be set with the environment variable
LVM\_SYSTEM\_DIR. In the `lvm.conf` file you can specify additional
configuration to load. To display the current settings, you can execute
the lvm dumpconfig command.

vgscan pvs The `vgscan` command scans for block devices with lvm
metadata on it. These physical volumes are stored in the lvm cache. This
command uses the `lvm.conf` file to determine that. When for instance
you use multipath devices, the metadata is the same on all the disks, on
the different paths. Which will cause a lot of duplicates when you run
`pvs`. Also when you want to boot of a multipath device, it can boot of
a single path. You can use the filter option in the devices section for
this in the `lvm.conf`, to skip the other devices and only look for
multipath devices. The filter option uses regular expression to accept
or reject block devices, like in below examples. Add all discovered
devices:

                filter = [ "a/.*/" ]
                

Filter to remove cdrom devices:

                filter = [ "r|/dev/cdrom|" ]
                

Filter only device mapper names on a multipath device:

                filter = [ "a|/dev/disk/by-id/dm-uuid-.*-mpath-.*|", "r|.*|" ]
                

This filter just adds partition 8 on the first IDE Harddrive and removes
all other block devices.

                filter = [ "a|^/dev/hda8$|", "r/.*/" ]
                

Other usefull and commonly used option in the devices sections in the
`lvm.conf` are: preferred\_names The earliest pattern is used in any
output like `pvs`. So in our example of multipath devices we want.

                preferred_names = [ "^/dev/mpath/", "^/dev/mapper/mpath", "^/dev/[hs]d" ]
                

types If you boot from a local device and the rest are multipath
devices, you need to change the types option, next to the filter option
with this example. I tells LVM the acceptable block devices
(device-mapper) and the allowed partitions (253)

                types = [ "device-mapper", 253 ]
                

For other sections with options check: `man lvm.conf`
